docs: add guide for post-launch contract deployments on Orbit chains using sendL2Message (#2191)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: arbitrum-docs/launch-orbit-chain/04-maintain-your-chain/04-guidance/05-post-launch-contract-deployments.mdx

---

> title: 'Deploying contracts after Orbit chain launch'

Reviewer: I feel like we should use a term that better identifies these kind of contracts. "Deploying contracts" seems a bit vague, IMO.

I don't know what's a good term to use here, but here are a few alternatives I can think of: "Deterministic singleton contracts", "deterministic address contracts", "nonce-zero contracts", ...

From all of those, I like the first better, but I guess any could work, since you are already describing them clearly in the first paragraph.

Reviewer: Ahh, "Post-launch deployment of deterministic contracts". I like it!

sidebar_label: ' Post-launch deployments'
description: 'Learn about deploying contracts like Multicall3 to an Orbit chain after launch using sendL2Message, without needing a chain upgrade or predeploy.'
author: mahsamoosavi
sme: mahsamoosavi
target_audience: 'Developers deploying and maintaining Orbit chains.'
sidebar_position: 8
user_story: As a current or prospective Orbit chain deployer, I need to learn how to deploy contracts like Multicall3 *after* the chain has launched, so that I can use them at known addresses without needing to restart or modify the chain config.
content_type: how-to
---

> You can deploy contracts like `Multicall3`, the `EntryPoint` contract, or a `create2` factory to a live Orbit chain using a post-launch method that doesn't require any chain configuration changes or upgrades.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can deploy contracts like `Multicall3`, the `EntryPoint` contract, or a `create2` factory to a live Orbit chain using a post-launch method that doesn't require chain configuration changes or upgrades.
```

> This method leverages Arbitrum's built-in cross-chain messaging infrastructure. Specifically, it uses the `Inbox.sendL2Message` function to submit a pre-signed child chain transaction from the parent chain. Unlike retryable tickets, messages sent this way do not incur parent chain data fees and are not limited by the 100,000 gas cap that applies to certain deterministic deployment flows.

Reviewer: > do not incur parent chain data fees

maybe explain this further "do not incur parent chain data fees on execution (they are paid when submitting the transaction on the parent chain)". Or something like that.

> This method leverages Arbitrum's built-in cross-chain messaging infrastructure. Specifically, it uses the `Inbox.sendL2Message` function to submit a pre-signed child chain transaction from the parent chain. Unlike retryable tickets, messages sent this way do not incur any parent chain data fees and are not limited by the 100,000 gas cap that applies to certain deterministic deployment flows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This method leverages Arbitrum's built-in cross-chain messaging infrastructure. Specifically, it uses the `Inbox.sendL2Message` function to submit a pre-signed child chain transaction from the parent chain. Unlike retryable tickets, messages sent this way do not incur parent chain data fees and are not limited by the 100,000 gas cap that applies to certain deterministic deployment flows.
```

## When to use this method

> This a is useful when:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach is useful when:
```

- Your Orbit chain is already live.

> - You want to deploy a contract at a specific address (e.g., using CREATE2).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- You want to deploy a contract at a specific address (e.g., using `CREATE2`).
```

- The chain's genesis configuration did not include the contract.

Common use cases include:

- Deploying `Multicall3`.
- Deploying the `ERC-4337 EntryPoint` contract.

> - Deploying a `create2` factory or deterministic deployment proxy.

Reviewer: We could add an info admonition below mentioning the contracts that are deployed when creating a chain (as long as `deployFactoriesToL2` is set to true on `createRollup()`).

The four contracts listed [here](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-contracts/blob/main/src/rollup/DeployHelper.sol).

## Overview

To deploy a contract post-launch:

> **1. Fund the deployer address on the child chain:** Send `ETH` to the child chain address that will send the deployment transaction. Funding is possible using a retryable ticket or parent chain-to-child chain deposit.

Reviewer: > parent chain-to-child chain

I found this a bit hard to read. Some alternatives we use in other places are "ParentChain-to-ChildChain", or "Parent-to-Child chain"

> **1. Fund the deployer address on the child chain:** Send ETH to the child chain address that will be used to send the deployment transaction. This can be done using a retryable ticket or parent chain to child chain deposit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**1. Fund the deployer address on the child chain:** Send `ETH` to the child chain address that will send the deployment transaction. Funding is possible using a retryable ticket or parent chain-to-child chain deposit.```

> **2. Create the signed child chain transaction:** Construct and sign a raw child chain transaction that performs the contract deployment (e.g., using CREATE2). [DeployHelper.sol](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-contracts/blob/main/src/rollup/DeployHelper.sol) can be used as a reference for formatting the transaction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**2. Create the signed child chain transaction:** Construct and sign a raw child chain transaction that performs the contract deployment (e.g., using `CREATE2`). [DeployHelper.sol](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-contracts/blob/main/src/rollup/DeployHelper.sol) can be used as a reference for formatting the transaction.
```

**3. Send the message from the parent chain:** Call `Inbox.sendL2Message(bytes calldata message)` on the Orbit chain’s inbox contract. Provide the signed transaction as the input.

> **4. Execute the transaction on the child chain:** The child chain will process and execute the message as a regular transaction. This flow does not use retryables, so the transaction is not auto-retried if it fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**4. Wait for the transaction to be executed on the child chain:** The child chain will process and execute the message as a regular transaction. This flow does not use retryables, so the transaction is not auto-retried if it fails.
```
Just so the reader knows they don't have to do anything actively.

It'd be nice to also explain what happens if it fails. Is the nonce burned? Can they try sending the transaction again from the parent chain?

If the nonce is burned, we can add a warning box recommending to make sure the address is well funded on the child chain before sending the transaction to avoid burning the nonce.

> **4. Execute the transaction on the child chain:** The child chain will process the message and execute it as a regular transaction. This flow does not use retryables, so the transaction is not auto-retried if it fails.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**4. Execute the transaction on the child chain:** The child chain will process and execute the message as a regular transaction. This flow does not use retryables, so the transaction is not auto-retried if it fails.
```

## Advantages and considerations

> This approcah avoids parent chain data fees and bypasses the 100,000 gas limit associated with retryable tickets. It also requires no chain upgrade or restart and works on any standard Arbitrum or Orbit chain setup. However, since the flow bypasses retryable safety mechanisms, failed transactions are not automatically retried. The sender must have enough ETH on child chain to cover gas costs, and the signed transaction must be valid and use the correct nonce.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach avoids parent chain data fees and bypasses the 100,000 gas limit associated with retryable tickets. It also requires no chain upgrade or restart and works on any standard Arbitrum or Orbit chain setup. However, failed transactions are not automatically retried since the flow bypasses retryable safety mechanisms. The sender must have enough `ETH` on child chain to cover gas costs, and the signed transaction must be valid and use the correct nonce.
```

This method leverages Arbitrum's built-in cross-chain messaging infrastructure. Specifically, it uses the `Inbox.sendL2Message` function to submit a pre-signed child chain transaction from the parent chain. Unlike retryable tickets, messages sent this way do not incur parent chain data fees during execution;they're paid upfront when the message is submitted on the parent chain. This also means they're not limited by the 100,000 gas cap that applies to certain deterministic deployment flows.

## When to use this method

This approach is useful when:

- Your Orbit chain is already live.
- You want to deploy a contract at a specific address (e.g., using `create2`).
- The chain's genesis configuration did not include the contract.

Common examples include deployments of contracts like `Multicall3`, the `ERC-4337 EntryPoint` contract, or a `create2` factory/deterministic deployment proxy.
Note that if `deployFactoriesToL2` is set to `true` when calling `createRollup()`, the following contracts are deployed to the Orbit chain by default:

> - `Multicall3`

Reviewer: nit: we could add the links to these repos here for completeness.

Reviewer: These are well known contracts, and we could point at their github repos (which are the main source for their documentation), but not a big deal if we don't add them.

- `CREATE3Deployer`

## Overview

To deploy a contract post-launch:

**1. Fund the deployer address on the child chain:** Send `ETH` to the child chain address that will send the deployment transaction. Funding is possible using a retryable ticket or Parent-to-Child chain deposit.

**2. Create the signed child chain transaction:** Construct and sign a raw child chain transaction that performs the contract deployment (e.g., using `create2`). [`DeployHelper.sol`](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-contracts/blob/main/src/rollup/DeployHelper.sol) can be used as a reference for formatting the transaction.

**3. Send the message from the parent chain:** Call `Inbox.sendL2Message(bytes calldata message)` on the Orbit chain’s inbox contract. Provide the signed transaction as the input.

**4. Wait for the transaction to be executed on the child chain:** The child chain will process and execute the message as a regular transaction. This flow does not use retryables, so if the transaction fails, it is not auto-retried and the nonce is consumed. This means the same transaction cannot be replayed, and a new transaction with a higher nonce must be created and submitted.

:::warning

> Make sure the deployer address is sufficiently funded on the child chain before sending the transaction. If the transaction runs out of gas or fails for any reason, the nonce will be burned and the deployment will need to be retried with a new nonce and payload.

Reviewer: If the nonce is burned, the address where the contract will be created won't be the expected one anymore. So they can't really retry with a new nonce.

One alternative could be: "the nonce will be burned and the contract won't be deployable at the expected address.", but change as you see fit (I'm not very inspired today)

Author: I think they can still try with a new nonce and payload. We can add sth about "the contract not being deployable at the expected address". What do you think?

Reviewer: One of the main expected behaviours of these contracts is that they are deployed at deterministic, precalculated, addresses, so if they are deployed at a different address it can break tooling and other dapps that are built around them. So mentioning that the nonce is burned is probably important (along with what you mention about not being deployable at the expected address)
